{"url": "https://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/authoring/cambridge/minutes.html", "content": "<HTML>\n<HEAD>\n<TITLE>Meeting Minutes, Informal Technical Meeting on WWW Distributed\n      Authoring and Versioning, Cambridge, Mass.</TITLE>\n</HEAD>\n<BODY>\n\n<CENTER>\n<H1>Minutes</H1>\n      \n<H2>Informal Technical Meeting on WWW Distributed Authoring\nand Versioning</H2>\n\n<H3>MIT Faculty Club, Cambridge, Mass.</H3>\n\n<H3>September 16, 1996</H3>\n</CENTER>\n\n\n<P>\nAn informal technical meeting on the subject of Distributed Authoring\nand Versioning on the World Wide Web was held on September 16, 1996,\nat the MIT Faculty Club, on the campus of the Massachusetts Institute\nof Technology, Cambridge, Mass.  There were 19 attendees from the\nfollowing organizations: America Online, Apache Group, Dynamic\nDiagrams, Harlequin, Microsoft, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,\nMortice Kern Systems, Open Group Research Institute, Novell, NTT Palo\nAlto Labs, University of California, Irvine, World Wide Web\nConsortium, and Xerox.  The attendees thank the World Wide Web\nConsortium for graciously supplying the meeting site and food.  Many\nthanks also go to Susan Hardy, W3C, for her help in arranging the\nmeeting.\n\n<P>\nThese meeting minutes were recorded by Jim Whitehead.  The Chair of\nthe Meeting was Jim Whitehead.  These notes were not developed into\nminutes until June, 1997, and were never approved by the attendees of\nthe meeting.  Thus, while every effort has been made to ensure these\nnotes reflect the activities which took place at this meeting, they\nhave not been subject to review, and hence may reflect the bias of the\nrecorder.\n\n<P>\nIntroductory remarks by Jim Whitehead.\n\n<P>\nPresentation by Yaron Goland on an overview of Microsoft Distributed\nAuthoring and Versioning Requirements and draft implementation\nideas.\n\n<P>\nDescribed interest in subject. Microsoft is very interested in\nfollowing standards.\n\n<P>\nThere are many distributed authoring and versioning tools available\ntoday -- this is not new.\n\n<P>\nWhat people want for tomorrow: location independence, and collaboration.\n\n<P>\nBackwards compatibility is very important.  VSS team admits they\nwill not be able to give full backward compatibility to people\nwith only browsers.  Backawards compatibility leads to URL munging,\nwhich is not desirable.\n\n<P>\nNeed groups of functionality, so if you want versioning, use the\nversioning functionality package of HTTP.\n\n<P>\nAttributes.  Need attributes, they're very powerful.  Need a registry\nfor the namespace -- perhaps have per-company (novell.*) registry.\nCan do security, for example.\n\n<P>\nDirectory URL.  URL ends with a slash.  Need directory infomation\nin a standard format.  Interactions with other functions needs\nto be discussed -- for example, DELETE should delete the directory,\nand all files &amp; directories below it.\n\n<P>\nFile control for URLs - Copy, Delete, Get, Move, Put, Rename.\nIssue of copying from one server to another is tricky, need for\nmany.\n\n<P>\nNeed for byte ranges and insertions.  Don't want to change whole\nfile just for 10 byte insertion.\n\n<P>\nWord and Excel need locking, are &quot;dead in the water&quot;\nwithout it, and with full [Full|Partial][Read|Write][Lock|Unlock]\ncapability. Locks need to be independent of other methods.\n\n<P>\nChecking out a directory -- should this be recursive?  Should\nall operations on directories be recursive?  Attributes could\nbe powerful enough to implement check-out -- just store the person\nwho has checked out the file into an attribute.\n\n<P>\nCommand comments -- the ability to add a string or URL to any\nmethod.  Can be used for comments for checkin and checkout.\n\n<P>\nServer diff capability. Use VTML for returning a server-generated\ndiff between two files.  Want the server to be able to do a diff\n-- for efficiency?\n\n<P>\nMerge - need to be able to specificy how to do this on either\nthe client or the server.\n\n<P>\nSearch - requirements: wild card and regular expressions.  Don't\ndo this through URL munging -- do it with a new method.\n\n<P>\nVersion identification -- requirement: URL independent.\n\n<P>\nAccess control.  Needs to support group management.  Suggest the\nformation of another group to address access control.  This could\ncause a major interoperability problem.  All our work could be\nfor naught if access control is proprietary, but everything else\nis open.\n\n<P>\nStressed need to make separate specifications so companies can\npick them up or put them down, depending on whether they need\nthem.\n\n<P>\nDel Jensen: Working on server side diff for his product.  What\nabout different types?\n\n<P>\nYaron Goland (YG): Can specify the type you want for the diff\ncoming back.\n\n<P>\nSteve Carter: Need to abstract the notion of directory away from\njust a directory.  ODMA as an example.\n\n<P>\nYG: Word supports ODMA.\n\n<P>\nNeed to discover where artifacts are.\n\n<P>\nJudith Slein (JS): Need ability to say &quot;Show me everything\nin the X collection.&quot;\n\n<P>\nHenrik Frystyk Nielsen (HN): Why do we need file operations? \nI don't see a clear need why they are needed.  For the first time\nthere's a naming scheme which is finally independent of the filesystem.\n\n<P>\nYG: Users want it to be able to aggregate their information into\nhierarchies.  Can specify these capabilities as a PEP extension.\n\n<P>\nHN: Can simply specify relations between items, and this is used\nto organize information.\n\n<P>\nYG: Users want this ability.  As a result, MS is going to implement\nthis capability.\n\n<P>\nSome discussion of interaction between names, versions, and caching.\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of retrieving a named version of an entity.  Should\nit be possible to get there directly, or via a history view, then\nto the version itself.\n\n<P>\nNovell also needs direct access to a named version of an entity.\n\n<P>\n------\n\n<P>\nPresentation by Jim Whitehead on Distributed Authoring Requirements.\n\n<P>\nDuring the presentation, many comments on the requirements were\nmade:\n\n<P>\n- change &quot;entity&quot; to &quot;resource&quot; throughout<BR>\n- there is a need to list relationships in addition to creating,\nquerying, and deleting them<BR>\n- there is a need for a relationship discovery mechanism<BR>\n- the terminology used to describe locks is inconsistent with\nstandard usage, and needs to be made consistent with standard\nlock/transaction semantics<BR>\n- a read lock should have the meaning that only the owner of the\nlock may read the resource<BR>\n- there needs to be a section describing lock combinations<BR>\n- the server makes administrative policies about locks<BR>\n- the section &quot;Notification of Intention to Edit&quot; needs\nto be moved to the versioning requirements document<BR>\n- in partial write, a note needs to be made that updates can be\nsmall or large, and can extend past the end of the resource<BR>\n- a question was raised whether support for move/rename capability\nacross servers would also be supported<BR>\n- there is a need for a new requirement for server difference\nfunctionality on a per media type basis, since it is cheaper than\nperforming two gets, especially for small changes.<BR>\n- interactions with digitial signitures need to be explored<BR>\n- a comparison with the DMA (AIIM) requirements would be worthwhile<BR>\n</P>\n\n<P>\n------\n\n<P>\nPresentation by Jim Whitehead on the Group's Charter\n\n<P>\nWording changes to the Charter were suggested.\n\n<P>------\n\n<P>\nPresentation by David Durand on Versioning Requirements\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of overlapping requirements.  Notification of intention\nto edit --&gt; versioning.  Locking remains in distributed authoring.\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of non-change of versions.  Problem is a version could\nbe accessed via more than one name.  How to specify the requirement\nwithout basing it on a name.\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of client interoperability.  Jim Whitehead (JW) thought\nthat the server should adapt to the clients.  Most others thought\nthat a client would adapt to the particular implementation offered\nby a server.\n\n<P>\nBig discussion over backawards compatibility, and whether a version\nshould be specified in a URL.  Seemed to be consensus that there\ndoes need to be support for non-version aware clients.\n\n<P>\nDavid Long (DL): Discussion of name of all versions of a resource\nvs. name of individual versions sounds a lot like content negotiation.\n\n<P>\nAgreement on &quot;deafult&quot; or &quot;tip&quot;.\n\n<P>\nAgreement on getting to pred/succ//root/default version of a document.\n\n<P>\nRemove timeouts on locks.  Wasn't perceived as very useful.\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of delete vs. destroy.  Destroy is a common functionality.\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of server diff -- need to get a diff of two objects\nwhich are large, but which may have a small set of differences.\n\n<P>\n------\n\n<P>\nDiscussion of Action Items:\n\n<P>\nModify Distributed Authoring Requirements based on feedback and\nput it out this week.\n\n<P>\nRevise the scenarios document this week.\n\n<P>\nRevise the Charter based on feedback from the meeting.\n\n<P>\nRevise the Versioning Requirements by two weeks from this Friday.\n\n<P>\nScenarios of server-server activities should be submitted during\nthe week of Sept. 23-28.<BR>\n\n<P><I>*** Meeting Adjourned ***</I>\n\n</BODY>\n\n\n\n</HTML>\n\n", "encoding": "ascii"}