{"url": "https://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/versioning/arch/0049.html", "content": "<!-- received=\"Thu Jun 06 23:57:00 1996 PDT\" -->\n<!-- sent=\"Thu, 6 Jun 1996 23:56:10 PDT\" -->\n<!-- name=\"Larry Masinter\" -->\n<!-- email=\"masinter@parc.xerox.com\" -->\n<!-- subject=\"Re: More versioning thoughts.\" -->\n<!-- id=\"ade2639c37021004a2fa@[128.195.21.209]\" -->\n<!-- inreplyto=\"More versioning thoughts.\" -->\n<title>Archive of Working Group on Versioning and Configuration Management of World Wide Web Content: Re: More versioning thoughts.</title>\n<h1>Re: More versioning thoughts.</h1>\n<b>Larry Masinter</b> (<a href=\"mailto:masinter@parc.xerox.com\"><i>masinter@parc.xerox.com</i></a>)<br>\n<i>Thu, 6 Jun 1996 23:56:10 PDT</i>\n<p>\n<ul>\n<li> <b>Messages sorted by:</b> <a href=\"index.html#49\">[ date ]</a><a href=\"thread.html#49\">[ thread ]</a><a href=\"subject.html#49\">[ subject ]</a><a href=\"author.html#49\">[ author ]</a>\n<!-- next=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href=\"0050.html\">Larry Masinter: \"Re: Versioning Thoughts (in HTML)\"</a>\n<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href=\"0048.html\">David G. Durand: \"Re: High-level capabilities\"</a>\n<li> <b>Maybe in reply to:</b> <a href=\"0041.html\">Andre van der Hoek: \"More versioning thoughts.\"</a>\n<!-- nextthread=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next in thread:</b> <a href=\"0056.html\">David J. Fiander: \"Re: More versioning thoughts.\"</a>\n<!-- reply=\"end\" -->\n</ul>\n<hr>\n<!-- body=\"start\" -->\n<pre>\nSometimes you can get people to agree on the answer even when they\ncan't agree on the question. So I'm not so worried about divergent\ngoals. On the other hand, a Functional Requirements document would be\nthe right way to deal with the issue of common goals. Does someone\n(not me) want to draft a Functional Requirements document and submit\nit by next Thursday as an Internet Draft? (Mainly just to raise\nawareness of the issue.)\n\nI was hoping also that some things would get discussed at a July 8 f2f\nmeeting at NaviSoft, but I hadn't heard back about whether the July 10\nmeeting could get moved. (The DMA technical committee meets in the SF\nbay area July 9-12.)\n\nIf Navisoft can't host on July 8, I could probably arrange to host the\nmeeting at Xerox PARC.\n\nLarry\n</pre>\n<!-- body=\"end\" -->\n<hr>\n<p>\n<ul>\n<!-- next=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href=\"0050.html\">Larry Masinter: \"Re: Versioning Thoughts (in HTML)\"</a>\n<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href=\"0048.html\">David G. Durand: \"Re: High-level capabilities\"</a>\n<li> <b>Maybe in reply to:</b> <a href=\"0041.html\">Andre van der Hoek: \"More versioning thoughts.\"</a>\n<!-- nextthread=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next in thread:</b> <a href=\"0056.html\">David J. Fiander: \"Re: More versioning thoughts.\"</a>\n<!-- reply=\"end\" -->\n</ul>\n", "encoding": "ascii"}