{"url": "https://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/versioning/arch/0108.html", "content": "<!-- received=\"Thu Aug 22 15:25:00 1996 PDT\" -->\n<!-- sent=\"Thu, 22 Aug 1996 18:24:33 -0400\" -->\n<!-- name=\"Jim Whitehead\" -->\n<!-- email=\"ejw@ics.uci.edu\" -->\n<!-- subject=\"Current status\" -->\n<!-- id=\"ae428a5409021004bb29@[18.52.0.181]\" -->\n<!-- inreplyto=\"\" -->\n<title>Archive of Working Group on Versioning and Configuration Management of World Wide Web Content: Current status</title>\n<h1>Current status</h1>\n<b>Jim Whitehead</b> (<a href=\"mailto:ejw@ics.uci.edu\"><i>ejw@ics.uci.edu</i></a>)<br>\n<i>Thu, 22 Aug 1996 18:24:33 -0400</i>\n<p>\n<ul>\n<li> <b>Messages sorted by:</b> <a href=\"index.html#108\">[ date ]</a><a href=\"thread.html#108\">[ thread ]</a><a href=\"subject.html#108\">[ subject ]</a><a href=\"author.html#108\">[ author ]</a>\n<!-- next=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href=\"0109.html\">Yaron Goland: \"RE: Current status\"</a>\n<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href=\"0107.html\">David G. Durand: \"Re: Entity Tags\"</a>\n<!-- nextthread=\"start\" -->\n<!-- reply=\"end\" -->\n</ul>\n<hr>\n<!-- body=\"start\" -->\n<pre>\nThis message contains my current understanding of the status of this\nworking group.\n\nI received an email yesterday from Larry Masinter, Chair of the HTTP\nWorking Group.  He stated that:\n\n&gt;The deadline for 1.2 features was \"two weeks after the Montreal\n&gt;meeting\", and then \"August 1\", but of course, the deadline has no\n&gt;force, and new proposals can be entertained whenever. However, I'd\n&gt;like to encourage you to go public sooner rather than wait until you\n&gt;think you have it \"right\".\n\n&gt;If you're not ready to circulate a specification of the actual\n&gt;protocol changes, are you at least ready to circulate a specification\n&gt;of the requirements that might lead to protocol changes?\n\nI feel it is very important for this group to inform the HTTP 1.2 effort on\nthe requirements for versioning on the WWW.  As a result, there is one\ncurrent action item:\n\n- Submit a document on requirements for the capabilities which should be\nsupported in versioning via HTTP.  Status: David Durand and Fabio Vitali\nsubmitted to the list a draft requirements document.  David and I met today\nto discuss this requirements document, the result of which a slightly\nrevised requirements document will be presented to this list early next\nweek, hopefully end-of-day Monday.  This document will be forwarded to the\nHTTP WG at the end of next week, August 30.\n\nFollowing the generation of a requirements document, it makes sense to also:\n\n- Develop a document listing our proposal for implementing the capabilities\nlisted in the requirements document.  Whether these capabilities are\nimplemented in HTTP 1.2, or become an extension using PEP, it will be a\nworthwhile exercise to develop this draft proposal.  My current\nunderstanding of HTTP methods that might be proposed in this document are:\nLOCK, UNLOCK, LINK, UNLINK, and possibly a FLAG method.  This document has\nnot yet been started.\n\n- Jim Whitehead &lt;<a href=\"mailto:ejw@ics.uci.edu\">ejw@ics.uci.edu</a>&gt;\n</pre>\n<!-- body=\"end\" -->\n<hr>\n<p>\n<ul>\n<!-- next=\"start\" -->\n<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href=\"0109.html\">Yaron Goland: \"RE: Current status\"</a>\n<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href=\"0107.html\">David G. Durand: \"Re: Entity Tags\"</a>\n<!-- nextthread=\"start\" -->\n<!-- reply=\"end\" -->\n</ul>\n", "encoding": "ascii"}